POKE´LLMON: A Human-Parity Agent for Pokemon Battles ´
with Large Language Models
Sihao Hu, Tiansheng Huang, Ling Liu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332, United States
{sihaohu, thuang, ling.liu}@gatech.edu
https://poke-llm-on.github.io/
Abstract
We introduce POKE´LLMON, the first LLM-based
agent that achieves human-parity performance in
tactical battle games, as demonstrated in Pokemon ´
battles. The design of POKE´LLMON incorpo￾rates three key strategies: (i) In-context reinforce￾ment learning that instantly consumes text-based
feedback derived from battles to iteratively re￾fine the policy; (ii) Knowledge-augmented gener￾ation that retrieves external knowledge to coun￾teract hallucination and enables the agent to act
timely and properly; (iii) Consistent action gener￾ation to mitigate the panic switching phenomenon
when the agent faces a powerful opponent and
wants to elude the battle. We show that online bat￾tles against human demonstrates POKE´LLMON’s
human-like battle strategies and just-in-time de￾cision making, achieving 49% of win rate in the
Ladder competitions and 56% of win rate in the
invited battles. Our implementation and playable
battle logs are available at: https://github.
com/git-disl/PokeLLMon.
1. Introduction
Generative AI and Large Language Models (LLMs) have
shown unprecedented success on NLP tasks (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Brown et al., 2020; Xi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b).
One of the forthcoming advancements will be to explore
how LLMs can autonomously act in the physical world with
extended generation space from text to action, represent￾ing a pivotal paradigm in the pursuit of Artificial General
Intelligence (Goertzel & Pennachin, 2007; Goertzel, 2014).
Games are suitable test-beds to develop LLM-based
agents (Duan et al., 2022; Batra et al., 2020) to interact
with the virtual environment in a way resembling human be￾havior. For example, Generative Agents (Park et al., 2023)
conducts a social experiments with LLMs assuming various
Figure 1. At each turn, the player is requested to decide which
action to perform, i.e., whether to let Dragonite to take a move or
switch to another Pokemon off the field. ´
roles in a “The Sims”-like sandbox, where agents exhbit
behavior and social interactions mirroring humans. In Min￾craft, decision-making agents (Wang et al., 2023a;c; Singh
et al., 2023) are designed to explore the world and develop
new skills for solving tasks and making tools.
Compared to existing games, tactical battle games (Ma et al.,
2023) are better suited for benchmarking the game-playing
ability of LLMs as the win rate can be directly measured and
consistent opponents like AI or human players are always
available. Pokemon battles, serving as a mechanism that ´
evaluates the battle abilities of trainers in the well-known
Pokemon games, offer several unique advantages as the first ´
attempt for LLMs to play tactical battle games:
(1) The state and action spaces are discrete and can be trans￾lated into text losslessly. Figure 1 is an illustrative example
for a Pokemon battle: At each turn, the player is requested ´
to generate an action to perform given the current state of
Pokemon from each side. The action space consists of four ´
moves and five possible Pokemon to switch; (2) The turn- ´
based format eliminates the demands of intensive gameplay,
alleviating the stress on the inference time cost for LLMs,
making performance hinges solely on the reasoning abili￾ties of LLMs; (3) Despite its seemingly simple mechanism,
Pokemon battle is strategic and complex: an experienced ´
player takes various factors into consideration, including
species/type/ability/stats/item/moves of all the Pokemon ´
on and off the field. In a random battle, each Pokemon is ´
1
arXiv:2402.01118v3 [cs.AI] 2 Apr 2024
randomly selected from a large candidate pool (more than
1,000) with distinct characteristics, demanding the players
both the Pokemon knowledge and reasoning ability. ´
Scope and Contributions: The scope of this paper is to
develop an LLM-based agent that mimics the way a human
player engages in Pokemon battles. The objective is to ´
explore the key factors that make the LLM-based agent a
good player and to examine its strengths and weaknesses in
battles against human players. To enable LLMs play game
autonomously, we implement an environment that can parse
and translate battle state into text description, and deliver
generated action back to the server. By evaluating existing
LLMs, we identify the presence of hallucination, and the
panic switching phenomenon.
Hallucination: The agent can mistakenly send out Pokemon ´
at a type disadvantage or persist in using ineffective moves
against the opponent. As a result, the most advanced LLM,
GPT-4, achieves a win rate of 26% when playing against a
heuristic bot, compared to 60% win rate of human players.
To combat hallucination, we introduce two strategies: (1)
In-context reinforcement learning: We provide the agent
with text-based feedback instantly derived from the battle,
serving as a new form of “reward” to iteratively refine the
action generation policy without training; (2) Knowledge￾augmented generation: We equip the agent with Pokedex, ´
an encyclopaedia in Pokemon games that provides external ´
knowledge like type advantage relationship or move/ability
descriptions, simulating a human player searching for the
information of unfamiliar Pokemon. ´
Panic switching: We discover that when the agent encoun￾ters a powerful Pokemon, it tends to panic and generates ´
inconsistent actions like switching different Pokemon in ´
consecutive turns to elude the battle, a phenomenon that is
especially pronounced with Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al.,
2022) reasoning. Consistent action generation alleviates
the issue by voting out the most consistent action without
overthinking. This observation mirrors human behavior,
where in stressful situations, overthinking and exaggerating
difficulties can lead to panic and impede acting.
Online battles demonstrate POKE´LLMON’s human￾competitive battle abilities: it achieves a 49% win rate in
the Ladder competitions and a 56% win rate in the invited
battles. Furthermore, we reveal its vulnerabilities to human
players’ attrition strategies and deceptive tricks.
In summary, this paper makes four original contributions:
• We implement and release an environment that enables
LLMs to autonomously play Pokemon battles. ´
• We propose in-context reinforcement learning to in￾stantly and iteratively refine the policy, and knowledge￾augmented generation to combat hallucination.
• We discover that the agent with chain-of-thought ex￾periences panic when facing powerful opponents, and
consistent action generation can mitigate this issue.
• POKE´LLMON, to the best of our knowledge, is the first
LLM-based agent with human-parity performance in
tactical battle games.
2. LLMs as Game Players
Communicative games: Communicative games revolve
around communication, deduction and sometimes deception
between players. Existing studies show that LLMs demon￾strate strategic behaviors in board games like Werewolf (Xu
et al., 2023), Avalane (Light et al., 2023), WorldWar II (Hua
et al., 2023) and Diplomacy (Bakhtin et al., 2022).
Open-ended games: Open-ended games allow players to
freely explore the game world and interact with others.
Generative Agent (Park et al., 2023) showcases that LLM￾based agents exhibit behavior and social interactions mir￾roring human-like patterns. In MineCraft, Voyager (Wang
et al., 2023a) employs curriculum mechanism to explore
the world and generates and executes code for solving tasks.
DEPS (Wang et al., 2023c) proposes an approach of “De￾scribe, Explain, Plan and Select” to accomplish 70+ tasks.
Planing-based frameworks like AutoGPT (Significant Grav￾itas) and MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023) can be adopted for
the exploration task as well.
Tactic battle games: Among various game types, tactical
battle games (Akata et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023) are particu￾larly suitable for benchmarking LLMs’ game-playing ability,
as the win rate can be directly measured, and consistent op￾ponents are always available. Recently, LLMs are employed
to play StarCraft II (Ma et al., 2023) against the built-in AI
with a text-based interface and a chain-of-summarization
approach. In comparison, POKE´LLMON has several advan￾tages: (1) Translating Pokemon battle state into text is loss- ´
less; (2) Turn-based format eliminates real-time stress given
the inference time cost of LLMs; (3) Battling against disci￾plined human players elevates the difficulty to a new height.
3. Background
3.1. Pokemon ´
Species: There are more than 1,000 Pokemon species ( ´ bul,
2024c), each with its unique ability, type(s), statistics (stats)
and battle moves. Figure 2 shows two representative
Pokemon: ´ Charizard and Venusaur.
Type: Each Pokemon species has up to two elemental ´
types, which determine its advantages and weaknesses. Fig￾ure 3 shows the advantage/weakness relationship between
18 types of attack moves and attacked Pokemon. For ex- ´
2
Species: Charizard
Ability: Blaze
Spe: 328
HP: 319 Atk: 293
Def: 280 Lv.87
Dragon Dance
Fire Blast
Outrage
Air Slash
Move:
Species: Venusaur
Ability: Overgrow
Spe: 284
HP: 364 Atk: 289
Def: 328 Lv.89
Move:
Synthesis
Solar Beam
Sludge Bomb
Giga Drain
[120]
[120]
[75]
[120]
[90]
[75]
Figure 2. Two representative Pokemon: ´ Charizard and Venusaur.
Each Pokemon has type(s), ability, stats and four battle moves. ´
ample, fire-type moves like “Fire Blast” of Charizard can
cause double damage to grass-type Pokemon like ´ Venusaur,
while Charizard is vulnerable to water-type moves.
Stats: Stats determine how well a Pokemon performs in ´
battles. There are four stats: (1) Hit Points (HP): determines
the damage a Pokemon can take before fainting; (2) Attack ´
(Atk): affects the strength of attack moves; (3) Defense
(Def): dictates resistance against attacks; (4) Speed (Spe):
determines the order of moves in battle.
Ability: Abilities are passive effects that can affect battles.
For example, Charizard’s ability is “Blaze”, which enhances
the power of its fire-type moves when its HP is low.
Move: A Pokemon can learn four battle moves, categorized ´
as attack moves or status moves. An attack move deals
instant damage with a power value and accuracy, and as￾sociated with a specific type, which often correlates with
the Pokemon’s type but does not necessarily align; A status ´
move does not cause instant damage but affects the battle
in various ways, such as altering stats, healing or protect
Pokemon, or battle conditions, ´ etc. There are 919 moves in
total with distinctive effect (bul, 2024b).
3.2. Battle Rule
In one-to-one random battles (Wikipedia, 2023), two battlers
face off, each with six randomly selected Pokemon. Initially, ´
each battler sends out one Pokemon onto the field, keeping ´
the others in reserve for future switches. The objective is to
make all the opponent’s Pokemon faint (by reducing their ´
HP to zero) while ensuring that at least one of own Pokemon ´
remains unfainted. The battle is turn-based: at the start of
each turn, both players choose an action to perform. Actions
fall into two categories: (1) taking a move, or (2) switching
to another Pokemon. The battle engine executes actions and ´
updates the battle state for the next step. If a Pokemon faints ´
after a turn and the battler has other Pokemon unfainted, the ´
battle engine forces a switch, which does not count as the
player’s action for the next step. After a forced switch, the
player can still choose a move or make another switch.
TYPE
Figure 3. Type advantage/weakness relationship. “+” denotes
super-effective (2x damage); “−” denotes ineffective (0.5x dam￾age); “×” denotes no effect (0x damage). Unmarked is standard
(1x) damage.
4. Battle Environment
Battle Engine: The environment interacts with a battle en￾gine server called Pokemon showdown ( ´ pok, 2024), which
provides a web-based GUI for human players, as well as
web APIs for interacting with message in defined formats.
Battle Environment: We implement a battle environment
based on (Sahovic, 2023a) to support LLMs autonomously
play Pokemon battles. ´ Figure 4 illustrates how the entire
framework works. At the beginning of a turn, the environ￾ment get an action-request message from the server, includ￾ing the execution result from the last turn. The environment
first parses the message and update local state variables,
and then translates the state variables into text. The text
description primarily consists of four parts: (1) Own team
information, including the attributes of Pokemon both on- ´
the-field and off-the-field; (2) Opponent team information
including the attributes of opposing Pokemon on-the-field ´
and off-the-field (some are unknown); (3) Battle field in￾formation like the weather, entry hazard and terrain; (4)
Historical turn log information, including previous actions
of both side Pokemon, which is stored in a log queue. LLMs ´
take the translated state as input and output an action for
the next step. The action is sent to the server and executed
alongside the action chosen by the human player.
5. Preliminary Evaluation
To gain insights into the challenges associated with
Pokemon battles, we evaluate the abilities of existing LLMs, ´
including GPT-3.5 (Ouyang et al., 2022), GPT-4 (Achiam
et al., 2023), and LLaMA-2 (Touvron et al., 2023),
5.1. Pokemon Battles ´
Placing LLMs in direct competitions against human players
is time-consuming as human needs time to think (4 minutes
for 1 battle in average). To save time, we adopt a heuris-
3
Figure 4. The framework that enables LLMs to battle with human players: It parses the messages received from the battle server and
translates state logs into text. LLMs take these state descriptions and historical turn logs as input and generates an action for the next step.
The action is then sent to the battle server and executed alongside the action chosen by the opponent player.
tic bot (Sahovic, 2023b) to initially battle against human
players in the Ladder competitions, and then use the bot to
benchmark existing LLMs. The bot is programmed to use
status boosting moves, set entry hazards, selecting the most
effective actions by considering the stats of Pokemon, the ´
power of moves, and type advantages/weaknesses.
Table 1. Performance of LLMs in battles against the bot.
Player Win rate ↑ Score ↑ Turn # Battle #
Human 59.84% 6.75 18.74 254
Random 1.2% 2.34 22.37 200
MaxPower 10.40% 3.79 18.11 200
LLaMA-2 8.00% 3.47 20.98 200
GPT-3.5 4.00% 2.61 20.09 100
GPT-4 26.00% 4.65 19.46 100
The statistic results are presented in Table 1, where the battle
score is defined as the sum of the numbers of the opponent’s
fainted Pokemon and the player’s unfainted Pok ´ emon at the ´
end of a battle. Consequently, the opponent player’s battle
score is equal to 12 minus the player’s battle score. Random
is a simple strategy that randomly generates an action every
time, and MaxPower chooses the move with the highest
power value. Obviously, GPT-3.5 and LLaMA-2 are just
slightly better than Random and even GPT-4 cannot beat
the bot, let along well-disciplined human players from the
Ladder competitions.
By observing LLMs play battles and analyzing the ex￾planations generated with their actions, we identify the
occurrence of hallucination (Rawte et al., 2023; Cabello
et al., 2023): LLMs can mistakenly claim non-existent type￾advantage relationships or, even worse, reverse the advan￾tage relationships between types like sending a grass-type
Pokemon to face with a fire-type Pok ´ emon. A clear under- ´
standing of type advantage/weakness is crucial in Pokemon ´
battles, as choosing a Pokemon with a type advantage can ´
result in dealing more damage and sustaining less.
5.2. Test of Hallucination
To assess hallucination in the outputs of LLMs, we con￾struct the task of type advantage/weakness prediction. The
task involves asking LLMs to determine if an attack of a
certain type is A. super-effective (2x damage), B. standard
(1x damage), C. ineffective (0.5x damage) or D. no effect
(0x damage) against a certain type of Pokemon. The 324 ´
(18x18) testing pairs are constructed based on Figure 3.
Table 2. Confusion matrices for type advantage prediction.
Model LLaMA-2 GPT-3.5 GPT-4
Class A B C D A B C D A B C D
A 5 46 0 0 0 0 49 2 37 8 5 1
B 25 179 0 0 2 6 185 11 0 185 17 2
C 15 46 0 0 0 2 57 2 3 24 32 2
D 1 7 0 0 0 0 7 1 0 0 0 8
Table 2 shows the three confusion matrices of LLMs, where
their performance is highly related to their win rates in Ta￾ble 1. LLaMA-2 and GPT-3.5 suffer from severe hallucina￾tion problems, while GPT-4 achieves the best performance
with an accuracy of 84.0%, we still observe it frequently
making ineffective actions, which is because in a single bat￾tle, LLMs need to compare the types of all the opponent’s
Pokemon with types of all their Pok ´ emon, as well as types ´
of moves.
4
Pokédex
feedback
State
Historical
logs
Turn T Turn T+1
action
action
action
action
(1) In-Context RL
(2) Knowledge-Augmented
Generation
(3) Consistent Action 
Generation
Battle Battle
LLM
Figure 5. POKE´LLMON is equipped with three strategies: (1)
ICRL that leverages instant feedbacks from the battle to itera￾tively refine generation; (2) KAG that retrieves external knowledge
to combat hallucination and to act timely and properly; (3) Consis￾tent Action Generation to prevent the panic switching problem.
6. POKE´LLMON
Overview: The overall framework of POKE´LLMON is illus￾trated in Figure 5. In each turn, POKE´LLMON uses previous
actions and corresponding text-based feedback to iteratively
refine the policy, and also augments the current state in￾formation with external knowledge, such as type advan￾tage/weakness relationships and move/ability effects. Given
above information as input, it independently generates mul￾tiple actions and selects the most consistent ones as the final
output for execution.
6.1. In-Context Reinforcement Learning (ICRL)
Human players make decisions based not only on the cur￾rent state but also on the (implicit) feedback from previous
actions, such as the change in a Pokemon’s HP over two ´
consecutive turns following an attack by a move. With￾out feedback provided, the agent can continuously stick to
the same erroneous action. As illustrated in Figure 6, the
agent uses “Crabhammer”, a water-type attack move against
the opposing Toxicroak, a Pokemon with the ability “Dry ´
Skin”, which can nullify damage from water-type moves.
The “Immune” message displayed in the battle animation
can prompt a human player to change actions even without
knowledge of “Dry Skin”, however, is not included in the
state description. As a result, the agent repeats the same
action, inadvertently giving the opponent two free turns to
triple Toxicroak’s attack stats, leading to defeat.
Reinforcement Learning (Schulman et al., 2017; Mnih et al.,
2016; Hafner et al., 2023) requires numeric rewards to eval￾uate actions for refining policy. As LLMs can understand
languages and distinguish what is good and bad, text-based
feedback description provides a new form of “reward”. By
incorporating text-based feedback from the previous turns
into the context, the agent is able to refine its “policy” it￾eratively and instantly during serving, namely In-Context
Reinforcement Learning (ICRL).
In practice, we generate four types of feedback: (1) The
Figure 6. The agent repeatedly uses the same attack move but has
zero effect to the opposing Pokemon due to its ability “Dry Skin.” ´
Figure 7. In turn 3, the agent uses “Psyshock”, which cause zero
damage to the opposing Pokemon. With ICRL, the agent switch to ´
another Pokemon. ´
change in HP over two consecutive turns, which reflects
the actual damage caused by an attack move; (2) The effec￾tiveness of attack moves, indicating whether they are super￾effective, ineffective, or have no effect (immunity) due to
type advantages or ability/move effects; (3) The priority
of move execution, providing a rough estimate of speed,
as precise stats for the opposing Pokemon are unavailable; ´
(4) The actual effects of executed moves: both status and
certain attack moves can cause outcomes like stat boosts
or debuffs, recover HP, inflict conditions such as poison,
burns, or freezing, etc. Figure 4 presents several instances
of generated text-based feedback for ICLR.
Table 3. Performance of ICRL in battles against the bot.
Player Win rate ↑ Score ↑ Turn # Battle #
Human 59.84% 6.75 18.74 254
Origin 26.00% 4.65 19.46 100
ICRL 36.00% 5.25 20.64 100
Table 3 shows the improvement brought by ICRL. Com￾pared to the original performance of GPT-4, the win rate is
boosted by 10%, and the battle score increases by 12.9%.
During the battles, we observe that the agent begins to
change its action if the moves in previous turns do not meet
the expectation, as shown in Figure 7: After observing that
the opposing Pokemon is immune to the attack, it switches ´
to another Pokemon. ´
6.2. Knowledge-Augmented Generation (KAG)
Although ICRL can mitigate the impact of hallucination,
it can still cause fatal consequences before the feedback is
received. For example, if the agent sends out a grass-type
Pokemon against a fire-type Pok ´ emon, the former is likely ´
be defeated in a single turn before the agent realize it is
a bad decision. To further reduce hallucination, Retrieval￾Augmented Generation (Lewis et al., 2020; Guu et al., 2020;
Patil et al., 2023) employ external knowledge to augment
5
Table 4. Performance of KAG in battles against the bot.
Player Win rate ↑ Score ↑ Turn # Battle #
Human 59.84% 6.75 18.74 254
Origin 36.00% 5.25 20.64 100
KAG[Type] 55.00% 6.09 19.28 100
KAG[Effect] 40.00% 5.64 20.73 100
KAG 58.00% 6.53 18.84 100
Figure 8. The agent understands the move effect and uses it prop￾erly: Klefki is vulnerable to the ground-type attack of Rhydon.
Instead of switching, the agent uses “Magnet Rise”, a move that
protects itself from the ground-type attack for five turns, invalidat￾ing the ground-type attack “Earthquake” of the opposing Rhydon.
generation. In this section, we introduce two types of exter￾nal knowledge to fundamentally mitigate hallucination.
Type advantage/weakness relationship: In the original
state description in Figure 4, we annotate all the type infor￾mation of Pokemon and moves to let the agent infer the type ´
advantage relationship by itself. To reduce the hallucination
contained in the reasoning, we explicitly annotate the type
advantage and weakness of the opposing Pokemon and our ´
Pokemon with descriptions like “ ´ Charizard is strong against
grass-type Pokemon yet weak to the fire-type moves”. ´
Move/ability effect: Given the numerous moves and abili￾ties with distinct effects, it is challenging to memorize all of
them even for experienced human players. For instance, it’s
difficult to infer the effect of a status move based solely on
its name: “Dragon Dance” can boost the user’s attack and
speed by one stage, whereas “Haze” can reset the boosted
stats of both Pokemon and remove abnormal statuses like ´
being burnt. Even attack moves can have additional effects
besides dealing damage.
We collect all the effect descriptions of moves, abilities from
Bulbapedia (bul, 2024b;a) and store them into a Pokedex, an ´
encyclopaedia in Pokemon games. For each Pok ´ emon on the ´
battlefield, its ability effect and move effects are retrieved
from the Pokedex and added to the state description. ´
Table 4 shows the results of generations augmented with
two types of knowledge, where type advantage relationship
(KAG[Type]) significantly boosts the win rate from 36%
to 55%, whereas, Move/ability effect descriptions also en￾hance the win rate by 4 AP. By combining two of them,
KAG achieves a win rate of 58% against the heuristic bot,
approaching a level competitive with human.
With external knowledge, we observe that the agent starts
to use very special moves at proper time. As an example
shown in Figure 8, a steel-type Klefki is vulnerable to the
ground-type attack of the opposing Rhydon, a ground-type
Pokemon. Usually in such a disadvantage, the agent will ´
choose to switch to another Pokemon, however, it chooses ´
to use the move “Magnet Rise”, which levitates the user to
make it immune to ground-type moves for five turns. As a
result, the ground-type attack “Earthquake” of the opposing
Rhydon becomes invalid.
6.3. Consistent Action Generation
Existing studies (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022; Shinn
et al., 2023; Bommasani et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2023)
show that reasoning and prompting can improve the abil￾ity of LLMs on solving complex tasks. Instead of gen￾erating a one-shot action, we evaluate existing prompting
approaches including Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022)
(CoT), Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2022) (SC) and Tree￾of-Thought (Yao et al., 2023) (ToT). For CoT, the agent
initially generates a thought that analyzes the current battle
situation and outputs an action conditioned on the thought.
For SC (k=3), the agent generates three times of actions and
select the most voted answer as the output. For ToT (k=3),
the agent generates three action options and picks out the
best one evaluated by itself.
Table 5. Performance of prompting approaches in battles against
the bot.
Player Win rate ↑ Score ↑ Turn # Battle #
Human 59.84% 6.75 18.74 254
Origin 58.00% 6.53 18.84 100
CoT 54.00% 5.78 19.60 100
SC (k=3) 64.00% 6.63 18.86 100
ToT (k=3) 60.00% 6.42 20.24 100
Table 5 presents the comparison results of the original IO
prompt generation and three algorithms. Notably, CoT re￾sults in a performance degradation by a 6 AP drop in the
win rate. In comparison, SC brings a performance improve￾ment, with the win rate surpassing human players. Beyond
the results, our greater interest lies in understanding the
underlying reasons for these observations.
As introduced in Section 3.2, for each turn there is sin￾gle action can be taken, which means if the agent chooses
to switch yet the opponent choose to attack, the switch-in
Pokemon will sustain the damage. Usually switching hap- ´
pens when the agent decides to leverage the type advantage
of an off-the-battle Pokemon, and thus the damage taken is ´
sustainable since the switch-in Pokemon is typically type- ´
resistant to the opposing Pokemon’s moves. However, when ´
the agent with CoT reasoning faces a powerful opposing
Pokemon, its actions become inconsistent by switching to ´
different Pokemon in consecutive turns, which we call ´ panic
switching. Panic switching wastes chances of taking moves
and leading to the defeat. An illustrative example is shown
6
Figure 9. When facing a powerful Pokemon, the agent with CoT ´
switches different Pokemon in three consecutive to elude the battle. ´
This gives the opponent three free turns to quadruple its attack
stats and quickly defeat the agent’s entire team.
in Figure 9: starting from turn 8, the agent chooses to con￾tinuously switch to different Pokemon in three consecutive ´
turns, giving the opposing Pokemon three free turns to boost ´
its attack stats to four times and take down the agent’s entire
team quickly.
Table 6. Statistic analysis of panic switching
Player Win rate ↑ Switch rate CS1 rate CS2 rate
Origin 58.00% 17.05% 6.21% 22.98%
CoT 54.00% 26.15% 10.77% 34.23%
SC (k=3) 64.00% 16.00% 1.99% 19.86%
ToT (k=3) 60.00% 19.70% 5.88% 23.08%
Table 6 provides statistical evidence, where CS1 represents
the ratio of active switches where the last-turn action is a
switch and CS2 rates represent the ratio of active switches
here at least one action from the last two turns is a switch,
among all active switches, respectively. The higher the CS1
rate, the greater the inconsistency of generation. Obviously,
CoT largely increases the continuous switch rate, whereas,
SC decreases the continuous switch rate.
Upon examining the thoughts generated by CoT, we observe
that the thoughts contain panic feelings: the agent describes
how powerful the opposing Pokemon is and the weaknesses ´
of the current Pokemon, and ultimately decides to switch to ´
another Pokemon, as in “ ´ Drapion has boosted its attack to
two times, posing a significant threat that could potentially
knock out Doublade with a single hit. Since Doublade is
slower and likely to be knocked out, I need to switch to
Entei because...”. Action generation conditioned on panic
thoughts leads the agent to continuously switch Pokemon ´
instead of attacking. In comparison, consistent action gen￾eration with SC decreases the continuous switch ratio by
independently generating actions multiple times and voting
out the most consistent action as shown in Figure 5, leading
to a higher win rate. The observation is reflecting: when
humans face stressful situations, overthinking and exagger￾ating difficulties lead to panic feelings and paralyze their
ability to take actions, leading to even worse situations.
Figure 10. POKE´LLMON selects effective moves in every turn,
causing the opponent’s entire team to faint using one Pokemon. ´
7. Online Battle
To test the battle ability of POKE´LLMON against human,
we set up the eighth-gen battles on Pokemon Showdown, ´
where the agent battled against random human players for
the Ladder competitions from Jan. 25 to Jan. 26, 2024. Be￾sides, we invited an human player who has over 15 years of
experience with Pokemon games, representing the average ´
ability of human players to play against POKE´LLMON.
7.1. Battle Against Human Players
Table 7. Performance of POKE´LLMON against human players.
v.s. Player Win rate ↑ Score ↑ Turn # Battle #
Ladder Player 48.57% 5.76 18.68 105
Invited Player 56.00% 6.52 22.42 50
Table 7 presents the performance of the agent against hu￾man players. POKE´LLMON demonstrates comparable per￾formance to disciplined Ladder players who have extensive
battle experience, and achieves a higher win rate than the
invited player. The average number of turns in the Ladder
competitions is lower because human players sometimes
forfeit when they believe they will lose to save time.
7.2. Battle Skill Analysis
Strength: POKE´LLMON seldom make mistakes at choos￾ing the effective move and switching to another suitable
Pokemon due to the KAG strategy. As shown in ´ Figure 10,
in one battle, the agent uses only one Pokemon to cause the ´
entire opponent team fainted by choosing different attack
moves toward different Pokemon. ´
Moreover, POKE´LLMON exhibits human-like attrition strat￾egy: With some Pokemon have the “Toxic” move that can ´
inflict additional damage every turn and the “Recover” move
that can recover its HP, the agent starts to first poisoned
the opposing Pokemon and frequently uses the “Recover” ´
to prevent itself from fainting. By prolonging the battle,
the opposing Pokemon’s HP is gradually depleted by the ´
poisoning damage. Using attrition strategy requires an un-
7
Figure 11. POKE´LLMON suffers from attrition strategies: the op￾ponent players frequently recover high-defense Pokemons. Break- ´
ing the dilemma requires joint effects across many turns.
derstanding of moves like “Toxic”, “Recover” and “Pro￾tect”, as well as the right timing for their use (such as
when there’s no type-weakness or when having high de￾fense). An example with battle animation can be found at:
https://poke-llm-on.github.io.
Weakness: POKE´LLMON tends to take actions that can
achieve short-term benefits, therefore, making it vulnerable
to human players’ attrition strategy that requires long-term
effort to break. As shown in the two battles in Figure 11,
after many turns, the agent’s entire team is defeated by the
human players’ Pokemon, which have significantly boosted ´
defense and engage in frequent recovery. Table 8 reports
the performance of POKE´LLMON in battles where human
players either use the attrition strategy or not. Obviously, in
battles without the attrition strategy, it outperforms Ladder
players, while losing the majority of battles when human
play the attrition strategy.
Table 8. Battle performance impacted by the attrition strategy
Ladder Win rate ↑ Score ↑ Turn # Battle #
w. Attrition 18.75% 4.29 33.88 16
w/o Attrition 53.93% 6.02 15.95 89
The “Recover” move recovers 50% HP in one turn, which
means if an attack cannot cause the opposing Pokemon more ´
than 50% HP damage in one turn, it will never faint. The
key to breaking the dilemma is to firstly boost a Pokemon’s ´
attack to a very high stage and then attack to cause unre￾coverable damage, which is a long-term goal that requires
joint efforts across many turns. POKE´LLMON is weak to the
long-term planing because current design does not keep a
long-term plan in mind across many timesteps, which will
be included in the future work.
Finally, we observe that experienced human players can
misdirect the agent to bad actions. As shown in Figure 12,
our Zygarde has one chance to use an enhanced attack move.
At the end of turn 2, the opposing Mawile is fainted, leading
to a forced switch and the opponent choose to switch in
Figure 12. An experienced human player misdirects the agent to
use a dragon-type attack by firstly sending out a dragon-type
Pokemon and immediately switch to another Pok ´ emon immune to ´
the dragon-type attack.
Kyurem. This switch is a trick that lures the agent uses a
dragon-type move in turn 3 because Kyurem is vulnerable
to dragon-type attacks. In turn 3, the opponent switches in
Tapu Bulu at the beginning, a Pokemon immune to dragon- ´
type attacks, making our enhanced attack chance wasted.
The agent is fooled because it makes decision only based
on the current state information, while experienced players
condition on not only the state information, but also the
opponent’s next action prediction.
Seeing through tricks and predicting the opponent’s next
action require the agent being disciplined in the real battle
environment, which is the future step in our work.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we enable LLMs to autonomously play the
well-known Pokemon battles against human. We intro- ´
duce POKE´LLMON, the first LLM-based agent that achieves
human-competent performance in tactical battle games. We
introduce three key strategies in the design of POKE´LLMON:
(i) In-Context Reinforcement Learning, which consumes
the text-based feedback as “reward” to iteratively refine the
action generation policy without training; (ii) Knowledge￾Augmented Generation that retrieves external knowledge to
combat hallucination and ensures the agent act timely and
properly; (iii) Consistent Action Generation that prevents
the panic switching issue when encountering powerful op￾ponents. The architecture of POKE´LLMON is general and
can be adapted for the design of LLM-based agents in many
other games, addressing the problems of hallucination and
action inconsistency.
Online battles show that POKE´LLMON demonstrates human￾like battle ability and strategies, achieving 49% of win rate
in the Ladder competitions and 56% of win rate in the
invited battles. Furthermore, we uncover its vulnerabilities
to human players’ attrition strategies and deception tricks,
which are considered as our future work.
8
References
List of abilities, 2024a. URL https://bulbapedia.
bulbagarden.net/wiki/Ability#List_of_
Abilities.
List of moves, 2024b. URL https://bulbapedia.
bulbagarden.net/wiki/List_of_moves.
List of pokemon by national pok ´ edex number, 2024c. ´
URL https://bulbapedia.bulbagarden.
net/wiki/List_of_Pokmon_by_National_
Pokdex_number.
Pokemon showdown, 2024. URL ´ https://play.
pokemonshowdown.com.
Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I.,
Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S.,
Anadkat, S., et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Akata, E., Schulz, L., Coda-Forno, J., Oh, S. J., Bethge, M.,
and Schulz, E. Playing repeated games with large lan￾guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16867, 2023.
Bakhtin, A., Brown, N., Dinan, E., Farina, G., Flaherty, C.,
Fried, D., Goff, A., Gray, J., Hu, H., et al. Human-level
play in the game of diplomacy by combining language
models with strategic reasoning. Science, 378(6624):
1067–1074, 2022.
Batra, D., Chang, A. X., Chernova, S., Davison, A. J., Deng,
J., Koltun, V., Levine, S., Malik, J., Mordatch, I., Mot￾taghi, R., et al. Rearrangement: A challenge for embodied
ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01975, 2020.
Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R.,
Arora, S., von Arx, S., Bernstein, M. S., Bohg, J., Bosse￾lut, A., Brunskill, E., et al. On the opportunities and risks
of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258,
2021.
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D.,
Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G.,
Askell, A., et al. Language models are few-shot learners.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
1877–1901, 2020.
Cabello, L., Li, J., and Chalkidis, I. Pokemonchat: Audit￾ing chatgpt for pok\’emon universe knowledge. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.03024, 2023.
Duan, J., Yu, S., Tan, H. L., Zhu, H., and Tan, C. A sur￾vey of embodied ai: From simulators to research tasks.
IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational
Intelligence, 6(2):230–244, 2022.
Goertzel, B. Artificial general intelligence: concept, state of
the art, and future prospects. Journal of Artificial General
Intelligence, 5(1):1, 2014.
Goertzel, B. and Pennachin, C. Artificial general intelli￾gence, volume 2. Springer, 2007.
Guu, K., Lee, K., Tung, Z., Pasupat, P., and Chang, M.
Retrieval augmented language model pre-training. In
International conference on machine learning, pp. 3929–
3938. PMLR, 2020.
Hafner, D., Pasukonis, J., Ba, J., and Lillicrap, T. Mastering
diverse domains through world models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
Hong, S., Zheng, X., Chen, J., Cheng, Y., Wang, J., Zhang,
C., Wang, Z., Yau, S. K. S., Lin, Z., Zhou, L., et al.
Metagpt: Meta programming for multi-agent collabora￾tive framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023.
Hu, S., Huang, T., ˙Ilhan, F., Tekin, S. F., and Liu, L.
Large language model-powered smart contract vulner￾ability detection: New perspectives. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.01152, 2023.
Hua, W., Fan, L., Li, L., Mei, K., Ji, J., Ge, Y., Hemphill, L.,
and Zhang, Y. War and peace (waragent): Large language
model-based multi-agent simulation of world wars. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.17227, 2023.
Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V.,
Goyal, N., Kuttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W.-t., Rockt ¨ aschel, ¨
T., et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge￾intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Pro￾cessing Systems, 33:9459–9474, 2020.
Light, J., Cai, M., Shen, S., and Hu, Z. From text to tac￾tic: Evaluating llms playing the game of avalon. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.05036, 2023.
Ma, W., Mi, Q., Yan, X., Wu, Y., Lin, R., Zhang, H., and
Wang, J. Large language models play starcraft ii: Bench￾marks and a chain of summarization approach. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.11865, 2023.
Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap,
T., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asyn￾chronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In
International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–
1937. PMLR, 2016.
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C.,
Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A.,
et al. Training language models to follow instructions
with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
9
Park, J. S., O’Brien, J., Cai, C. J., Morris, M. R., Liang,
P., and Bernstein, M. S. Generative agents: Interactive
simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology, pp. 1–22, 2023.
Patil, S. G., Zhang, T., Wang, X., and Gonzalez, J. E. Gorilla:
Large language model connected with massive apis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.
Rawte, V., Sheth, A., and Das, A. A survey of hallu￾cination in large foundation models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.05922, 2023.
Sahovic, H. Poke-env: pokemon ai in python, 2023a. URL
https://github.com/hsahovic/poke-env.
Sahovic, H. poke-env: Heuristicbot, 2023b. URL
https://github.com/hsahovic/poke-env/
blob/master/src/poke_env/player/
baselines.py.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Shinn, N., Labash, B., and Gopinath, A. Reflexion: an au￾tonomous agent with dynamic memory and self-reflection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366, 2023.
Significant Gravitas. AutoGPT. URL https://github.
com/Significant-Gravitas/AutoGPT.
Singh, I., Blukis, V., Mousavian, A., Goyal, A., Xu, D.,
Tremblay, J., Fox, D., Thomason, J., and Garg, A. Prog￾prompt: Generating situated robot task plans using large
language models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 11523–11530.
IEEE, 2023.
Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Almahairi,
A., Babaei, Y., Bashlykov, N., Batra, S., Bhargava, P.,
Bhosale, S., et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine￾tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288,
2023.
Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu,
Y., Fan, L., and Anandkumar, A. Voyager: An open￾ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Wang, L., Ma, C., Feng, X., Zhang, Z., Yang, H., Zhang, J.,
Chen, Z., Tang, J., Chen, X., Lin, Y., et al. A survey on
large language model based autonomous agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.11432, 2023b.
Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q., Chi, E., Narang,
S., Chowdhery, A., and Zhou, D. Self-consistency im￾proves chain of thought reasoning in language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
Wang, Z., Cai, S., Liu, A., Ma, X., and Liang, Y. Describe,
explain, plan and select: Interactive planning with large
language models enables open-world multi-task agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023c.
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F.,
Chi, E., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., et al. Chain-of-thought
prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
24824–24837, 2022.
Wikipedia. Gameplay of pokemon, 2023. URL ´
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Gameplay_of_Pok%C3%A9mon.
Xi, Z., Chen, W., Guo, X., He, W., Ding, Y., Hong, B.,
Zhang, M., Wang, J., Jin, S., Zhou, E., et al. The rise and
potential of large language model based agents: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.
Xu, Y., Wang, S., Li, P., Luo, F., Wang, X., Liu, W., and Liu,
Y. Exploring large language models for communication
games: An empirical study on werewolf. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.04658, 2023.
Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan,
K., and Cao, Y. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting
in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
2022.
Yao, S., Yu, D., Zhao, J., Shafran, I., Griffiths, T. L., Cao, Y.,
and Narasimhan, K. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate prob￾lem solving with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.10601, 2023.
10
